\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c to generate
@c          Info:        use Emacs' Texinfo menu...
@c          .pdf:        texi2dvi --pdf tnsdl.texinfo
@c          .html:       makeinfo --html [--no-split] tnsdl.texinfo
@c          .txt:        makeinfo --plaintext tnsdl.texinfo --output=tnsdl.txt
@c otherwise: makeinfo --help

@c %**start of header
@setfilename tnsdl

@set VERSION pre-2.0.1
@set TNSDL @acronym{TNSDL}
@set TITLE The GNU Emacs TNSDL Mode Manual 
@set TM tnsdl-mode

@settitle @value{TITLE} (for version @value{VERSION})

@syncodeindex fn cp

@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for GNU Emacs' @value{TM} what is made
to help programming in the @value{TNSDL} programming language.

Copyright @copyright{} 2007 NSN.

@quotation
Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright
notice and this notice are preserved.
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title @value{TITLE}
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}
@author Peter Tury

@c  The following two commands
@c  start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c So the toc is printed at the start.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top @value{TITLE}

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Preface::             How to read this manual.
* Getting Started::     Set up @value{TM}: download, install, etc.
* Everyday Usage::      Base functionalities.
* Customization::       How to custom-tailor this major mode to your needs.
* Contribute::          How to modify, bug-report, etc.
* Copying::             Your rights and freedoms.
* Supported Features::  What Emacs features are supported explicitly.
* News::                History and news.
* Index::
@end menu

@node Preface
@chapter Preface

@ifnotinfo
If reading off-Emacs (e.g. on printed paper or a @file{.pdf} or @file{.html} file(s))
I recommend reading only @ref{Set up GNU Emacs} and @ref{Set up tnsdl-mode}: after the
installations, reading this manual inside Emacs is much more convenient (e.g. all the
crossreferences will work).

If you're ``just interesting'' and don't want to install anything, then I suggest reading
only @ref{Everyday Usage}.
@end ifnotinfo

@ifinfo
If you don't know Info and feel got lost after a while, remember:
@table @key
@item l
Pushing key @key{l} takes you back to the @b{l}ast piece you read.
@item u
Key @key{u} takes one level @b{u}p in the documentation hierarchy.
@item SPC
Simply pushing the @key{space} bar navigates you through the whole documentation!
@end table
@end ifinfo

If you are an experienced Emacs user, then @ref{Everyday Usage}: it
is probably more than enough for you. If you have time for it, @ref{Getting Help} and
@ref{Useful Commands} also: you might find unknown useful Emacs utilities. If
you haven't installed Info files previously, then @ref{Documentation} for instructions.
Also @ref{Supported Features}.

@c node-->why emacs

@node Getting Started
@chapter Getting Started

This @value{TM} is written for every @value{TNSDL} users. Some of them might be
unfamiliar with GNU Emacs. In this chapter we summarize everything for a
successful start.

For other aspects @xref{Top,,,efaq}.

@noindent
For help about @value{TNSDL} itself, go to the @uref{http://nwiki.nokia.com/TNSDL,TNSDL nwiki}.

@menu
* Set up GNU Emacs::    Download and install.
* GNU Emacs Lifebelt::  Most basic commands for e.g. getting help.
* Set up tnsdl-mode::   Download and install.
@end menu

@node Set up GNU Emacs
@section Set up GNU Emacs

GNU Emacs is part of @acronym{DMXSee}. However, only an extremely old, outdated
version, what is not supported by @value{TM} from version 2.0.0 onwards.
Thus you have to install another, newer Emacs for yourself. Here follows how.

@noindent
For general info see @uref{xxx}. 

@noindent
For MS Windows installers, see @uref{xxx}.

@noindent
For MS Windows I recommend using the official precompiled binaries from
@uref{xxx}.
Their ``installation'' means unzipping the downloaded file and manually setting
some things in MS Windows:

@enumerate
@item Set @env{HOME} environment variable to point e.g. @file{C:\USERS\}.
Your @file{.emacs} file will be here. Remember its location!
@xref{Windows HOME,,,emacs}.
@item Associate @file{.sdl}, @file{.sdt}, @file{.spd}, @file{.sst} etc. files to Emacs.
@end enumerate

@noindent
Also @xref{Help installing Emacs,,,efaq},
and @ref{Using an already running Emacs process,,,efaq}.

@noindent
For info about starting and stopping Emacs @xref{Entering Emacs,,,emacs},
and @ref{Exiting,,,emacs}.

@noindent
For full details about start options @xref{Emacs Invocation,,,emacs}.

@node GNU Emacs Lifebelt
@section GNU Emacs Lifebelt

@menu
* Emacs Key Notation::  What you should know for the first time uing Emacs;
                          or e.g. to understand help.
* Emacs Terminology::   What you should know to e.g. understand help.
* Getting Help::        How to reach many helping functionalities.
* Useful Commands::     Some general Emacs key combinations especially
                          useful for @value{TM}.
@c add: useful features; e.g. svn-status, color-theme, ...
@end menu

@node Emacs Key Notation
@subsection Emacs Key Notation

Some keyboard notation used in Emacs manuals, helps, etc.:

@multitable {<down arrow>mm} {PAGE UP}
@headitem Key @tab Emacs notion
@item @key{Alt} @tab @key{M}
@item @key{Shift} @tab @key{S}
@item @key{Ctrl} @tab @key{C}
@item @key{down arrow} @tab @key{DOWN}
@item @key{F1} @tab @key{F1}
@item @key{Delete} @tab @key{DEL}
@item @key{Enter} @tab @key{RET}
@item @key{Space} @tab @key{SPC}
@item @key{Backspace} @tab @key{BS}
@item @key{PgUp} @tab @key{PAGEUP}
@end multitable

Examples:

@multitable {Key sequence in} {this is a long description placeholder...mmmm67...72}
@headitem Key sequence in Emacs notion @tab Meaning
@item @key{C-SPC} @tab Hold down @key{Ctrl} and push @key{Space} (set mark)
@item @key{M-w} @tab Hold down @key{Alt} and push @key{w} (copy)
@item @key{C-w} @tab Hold down @key{Ctrl} and push @key{w} (cut)
@item @key{C-y} @tab Hold down @key{Ctrl} and push @key{y} (paste)
@item @key{C-M-k} @tab Hold down both @key{Ctrl} and @key{Alt} and push @key{k}
(cut a balanced expression)
@item @key{S-down-mouse-1} @tab Hold down @key{Shift} and click with the left mouse button
(mouse-set-font)
@item @key{C-u 10 C-x $} @tab Hold down @key{Ctrl} and push @key{u};
then type @kbd{1 0}; then hold down @key{Ctrl} and push @key{x};
then type @key{$} (hides all lines indented by 10+ space)
@end multitable

@noindent
For more info @xref{Basic Keys,,,efaq}, @ref{User Input,,,emacs}, and @ref{M-x,,,emacs}...

@node Emacs Terminology
@subsection Emacs Terminology

These are not ``official'' definitions,
just short scratches for beginners to help understanding further
Emacs documentation.

@table @dfn
@item point
The @b{cursor} and/or its location (in terms of character position). @xref{Point,,,emacs}.
@item kill
Item is copied and deleted. Well known name for this functionality: ``@b{cut}''.
@item yank
Previously ``killed'' or ``copied'' item is @b{paste}d.
@item frame
It is a ``@b{window}'' from the windowing system's (e.g. MS Windows) point of view.
@item buffer
It is a piece of text. Usually a whole file's content.
@item window
A part of a ``frame''. One frame can consist of one or more windows.
Windows can be splitted into more (smaller) windows.
@item visit a file
Opening it in Emacs.
@item fontification
Syntax highlighting.
@item minibuffer
The (generally) one-line area at the bottom of a frame, where you can e.g. type
commands in. Note: Emacs communicates with you mainly via the minibuffer!
@xref{Minibuffer,,,emacs}.
@item command
An Emacs function designed to be callable by end users. @xref{Commands,,,emacs}.
@end table

For many more terms explained more exactly @xref{Glossary,,,emacs}.
For learning more about the screen @xref{Screen,,,emacs}.

@node Getting Help
@subsection Getting Help

Most of the ``interactive'' help within Emacs is available in Info.
To learn about its usage @xref{Top,,,info}.

Type @key{C-h ?} anytime for a list of available help possibilities. Some of them:
@table @key
@item C-h b
List all key sequences usable at the moment (in the current window!).
@item C-h i
Opens the Info reader with enourmos amount of available local,
hypertexted documentation.
@item C-h k
Type a key sequence or click a mouse button (e.g. on a menu): its help is shown.
@item C-h l
Helps finding out what triggered the last events: show your last 100 keystroke.
@end table

@xref{On-line manual,,,efaq}.

@xref{Learning how to do something,,,efaq}. Note especially @file{refcard} in it!

@node Useful Commands
@subsection Useful Commands

Several basic Emacs key combinations and commands are mentioned above
(@xref{Emacs Key Notation}, and @ref{Getting Help}).

Here I list some more, what are especially useful for @value{TNSDL}
development. (@value{TM}'s own commands are not listed here.
For them @xref{Everyday Usage}.)

If you read this in Emacs' Info reader (recommended),
then move the cursor (point) onto the function names below
one by one, and press @key{C-h f} @key{RET} on them: @key{C-h f} calls the
Emacs function (command) @code{describe-function} with default value
derived from text found around point.
(Note: Emacs communicates with you mainly via the minibuffer. Check it!)
Then @key{RET} tells that the
default's descripton is looked for. The ``description'' contains
the function's name, the actual key combination(s) bound to it, a short
description about its usage, etc. The best is to try them immediately
in a trial (@value{TNSDL}) buffer...

@code{indent-for-tab-command}

@code{isearch-forward} -- @code{isearch-backward}@*
@indent @code{isearch-forward-regexp} -- @code{isearch-backward-regexp}

@code{dabbrev-expand}

@code{query-replace} -- @code{query-replace-regexp}@*
@indent @code{replace-string} -- @code{replace-regexp}

@code{comment-dwim}

@code{just-one-space} -- @code{delete-horizontal-space}@*
@indent @code{delete-blank-lines}@*
@indent @code{kill-line} -- @code{kill-whole-line} -- @code{kill-sexp} --> @ref{Erasing,,,emacs}

@code{find-tag}

@code{forward-sexp} -- @code{backward-sexp}

@code{mark-sexp}

@code{split-window-vertically} -- @code{split-window-horizontally}@*
@indent @code{other-window}
@indent @code{delete-other-windows}

@code{kill-buffer}

@code{make-frame-command}

@code{count-lines-region} --> @ref{Position Info,,,emacs}

@code{goto-line} --> @ref{Moving Point,,,emacs}

@code{upcase-word} -- @code{downcase-word}

@code{undo}

@code{hs-minor-mode}

@code{color-theme-select} (requires @uref{http://www.,ColorThemes})

@noindent For others @xref{Help,,,emacs}. @ref{Basic,,,emacs}

@noindent Do not forget to check refcard.ps in the @file{emacs/etc} directory.

@node Set up tnsdl-mode
@section Set up tnsdl-mode

Everything what is needed for @value{TM} is downloadable from
@uref{http://xxx}.

In this section we describe all the details about how to use these files:
how to ``install'' the functionality and the documentation.
Source files also described with full details.

@menu
* Functionality::
* Documentation::
* Sources::
@end menu

@node Functionality
@subsection Functionality

@value{TM}'s functionality is implemented in one single file:
@file{tnsdl.el}. Since Emacs can interpret source files, you should have either this source file,
or its byte compiled version @file{tnsdl.elc} for using @value{TM}.

To make Emacs find this file when needed, copy it into a directory where
Emacs looks for such files: type @kbd{C-h v load-path @key{RET}}. This
brings up a help window showing the value (and meaning) of the variable
@code{load-path}. Any directory in the list will suffice;
@file{emacs/site-lisp} is dedicated to such purposes, so you can choose
it safely.

After copying @file{tnsdl.el(c)} into such a directory, Emacs can find
it. Now you have to order Emacs to load it when it starts. For this, locate
your @file{.emacs} file (@pxref{Set up GNU Emacs}) and add this line to its
end: @code{(load "tnsdl")}. Go to the end of the expression you've just typed
(so place the cursor (point) immediately after the closing paren @code{)}) and
type @kbd{C-x C-e}. From now on all @value{TM} functionalities should
be available. Try it by opening (visiting) a tnsdl file.

@xref{Lisp Libraries,,,emacs}.

@node Documentation
@subsection Documentation

@value{TM}'s documentation comes in the following forms:

@table @asis
@item Info
for online reading (inside Emacs or in another info reader),
@item PDF
for printing and 
@item HTML
for browsing in a web browser.
@end table

You know how to handle HTML and PDF files.

The Info file @file{tnsdl} can be ``installed'' for Emacs, so you will reach it
via the standard Emacs help system. Here is a step-by-step instruction how to install.

@enumerate
@item
Locate documentation coming with Emacs. You should find it under
@file{your Emacs documentation directory/info}. If you don't know where is it,
try searching e.g. for file @file{elisp-8}.
@item
Copy the info file @file{tnsdl} into this directory.
@item
Edit the file @file{dir} in this directory: add a line like
@verbatim

* TNSDL: (tnsdl).       Emacs mode for developing TNSDL PRBs.

@end verbatim
after e.g. the line
@verbatim

* Info: (info).         How to use the documentation browsing system.

@end verbatim
Next time you type @kbd{C-h i}, the hypertexted root of tnsdl-mode's documentation
will be linked in: type @kbd{RET} on it and start browsing!
@end enumerate

@node Sources
@subsection Sources

Here is a full list of @value{TM}'s source files along with their usage.
If you want to contribute to @value{TM} development, use (enhance) these files.
Otherwise you can safely skip this subsection.

@table @file
@item tnsdl.el
Contains the Emacs Lisp implementation of all the functionality of @value{TM}.
Byte compiled @file{tnsdl.elc} file can be generated from it.
@item tnsdl.texinfo
Source of all the documentation: both Info file @file{tnsdl}, @file{tnsdl.pdf} and
HTML documentation files are generated from it.
@item test_tnsdlmode.sdl
A (partly pathological) TNSDL file to test syntax highlighting, indenatation,
move commands, etc.
@item test_tnsdlmode.el
``Unit tests'' for @value{TM} development.
@end table

@node Everyday Usage
@chapter Everyday Usage

The purpose of @value{TM} is to help everyday sw development work.

Most of @value{TM} is nothing more than supporting and customizing
of standard Emacs functionalities.

Source code typing, modification, reviewing and navigation are helped
as well as compilation and other related activities. Details follows
in this chapter.

@menu
* Syntax Highlighting:: Various ways of it are introduced.
@c upcase
* Indentation::         Automatic and commanded; reindentation and
                          alignement.
* Navigation::          Jumping to different locations.
* Hide and Show::       Folding.
@c and manual region hiding.
* Compilation::         Compile your .pac from @value{TM}!
@end menu

@node Syntax Highlighting
@section Syntax Highlighting

This is standard Emacs functionality, but I added a menu for it:
Tnsdl > Font-lock.

Fontification can be totally switched off or switched on.

You can choose from a lot of ready-to-use color schemes or
you can define your own fonts to use. I recommend the former one
using ColorThemes: http:\\xxx.

When fontificaton is switched on, several levels can be applied:

@table @asis
@item Level-0
highlights only the most basic elements:
strings, comments, compiler directives and
STATEs, PROCEDUREs and TYPEs.
@item Level-1
adds fontification for all keywords
@item Level-2
additionally highlights
type names (like @samp{byte}, @samp{bool}, etc. or ending with @samp{_t}),
constant names (ending with @samp{_c} or @samp{_ec}),
variable and parameter names (starting with @samp{g_}, @samp{l_} or @samp{p_}), etc.
@end table

For more, general info @xref{Levels of Font Lock,,,elisp}.

@node Indentation
@section Indentation

@value{TM} indents lines automatically when @kbd{RET} is typed:
both the just-closed and the just-started lines are indented.

Typing @kbd{TAB} once tries to indent intelligently:
indentation happens (instead of inserting spaces or tabs)
if point wasn't in a place where inserting whitespace seems to be reasonable.

Second and following @kbd{TAB} typings do xxx. This in practice can be used
for alignement quite comfortably.

Regions etc. can be reindented using the Tnsdl menu.

Each line's indentation is calculated from patterns found in the actual
and preceding lines. When the actual line is empty (=just started),
calculation can be wrong easily. In such cases type the line and hope
@kbd{RET} at the end of the line will reindent well.

When automatic identation does a wrong job, indent
the line manually, and hope following lines' automatic indentation will
be calculated in a good way from it.

@node Navigation
@section Navigation
@c TAGing

A lot of standard (and sometimes most convenient!) possibilities
are not mentioned below. Check the @kbd{Edit} menu (especially its
@kbd{Search} and @kbd{Go To} submenus) for them.
I use @kbd{Incremental Search} most of the time.

Also note that @ref{Top,,,speedbar} is supported. Try it:
@kbd{M-x speedbar @key{RET}}.

@menu
* Nearby::   How to skip by symbol or by statement...
* Far::      How to skip decision branches, procedures, etc.
* Away::     Go away into (possibly) other files containing a
               specific definition...
@end menu

@node Nearby
@subsection Nearby

Use standard Emacs commands: `forward-word'/`backward-word', 
`forward-sentence'/`backward-sentence' (this is quite handy!),
etc.

@node Far
@subsection Far

Skipping bigger entities (e.g. branches of DECISIONs or any code
enclosed by <keyword>-END<keyword> pairs) is supported by the
`forward-sexp'/`backward-sexp' functions.

When you want to ``skip out'' from such a block, then
`tnsdl-goto-block-start'/`tnsdl-goto-block-end' can be used. These are
in the Tnsdl menu, but no keys are bound to them by default.

Skipping to the start/end of the actual PROCEDURE has its own menu and
keys. `beginning-of-defun'/`end-of-defun' do these.

Many other (probably interactively less useful) tnsdl-specific move
commands are defined: check (via @kbd{C-h a}) the commands starting with
@samp{tnsdl-goto-}.

Note: It is a good practice to use `point-to-register' to store any loaction
where to you want to go back later.

@node Away
@subsection Away

Skipping to a specific PROCEDURE or TYPE is easiest using TAG files.
Generate/refresh the TAG file using the menu @kbd{Etag}.
Sometimes you have to load the freshly generated file(s) using `visit-tags-table'.
Then use `find-tag'.
Usually it defaults to the right name, but you can type any name you
want.

@node Hide and Show
@section Hide and Show

Some bigger entities (e.g. branches of DECISIONs or complete PROCEDUREs
or their long FPAR or DCL parts or long comments, etc.) can be hidden
temporarily. This functionality is usually referred elsewhere as ``folding''.
Use `hs-minor-mode' for it. (It is not activated by @value{TM} by default,
you have to switch this minor mode on by yourself: type
@kbd{M-x hs-minor-mode @key{RET}}. Then its menu appears...)

@node Compilation
@section Compilation

Currently I suggest compilation is the following way.

@enumerate
@item
Create your own MS Windows batch file what compiles from command line.
E.g. a file @file{buildmyprb.cmd} could look like this: @*
@code{call meenv 5.1-0 @*
build -dstdout -mk2cd -rm2cd -test -timestamp my__scmx.pac.} @*
Note: these two lines are enough for compilation.
@item
Copy this @file{buildmyprb.cmd} into the directory where your @file{my__scmx.pac} resides.
@item
Open a file from this directory in Emacs. E.g. it is a good practice
to visit the @file{my__scmx.pac} file and set the @file{.img}'s id in it.
@item
@samp{M-x compile @kbd{RET} buildmyprb.cmd @kbd{RET}} @*
(Note: after the first time, you can use @samp{M-x recompile @kbd{RET}} instead.)
After this, compilation starts (you may have to open an SPM connection before it).
Compilation messages appears in their own buffer.
@value{TM} adds knowledge to highlight error and warning messages differently
and makes them links.
@item
Click on an error/warning message and the file at the problematic line will
be opened.
If Emacs ask you to locate the directory where the problematic file resides, then
usually the best is to open any TNSDL file from that directory and check-in TNSDL
menu's Compilation > In search path before the compilation process.
After this, all source files in that directory
fill be found automatically by Emacs.
@end enumerate

@node Customization
@chapter Customization

To customize @value{TM} use the menu @kbd{Tnsdl > Customize}.

It is usually a good idea to bind your favourite commands to key combinations,
so you don't have to type @kbd{M-x my-fav-command @key{RET}} always.
You can choose any key combination you like (even ``self inserting'' keys
like @key{TAB} or @key{RET} or simple symbols like @key{~} or letters etc.
can be rebound), but @kbd{C-c @key{letter}} are reserved for such purposes
(=for users):
no major or minor modes should use them.

To bind e.g. @kbd{C-c b} to the command `tnsdl-goto-block-start', put this line
into your @file{.emacs} file (append to its end):
@lisp
(define-key tnsdl-mode-map "\C-cb" 'tnsdl-goto-block-start)
@end lisp

@node Contribute
@chapter Contribute

If you simply use this @value{TM} and send your comments to the author,
then you help a lot! (For names @ref{xxx,,,xxx}.)

However, you are free to modify any source files (either documentation or
test or implementation sources). If you do it, please inform the author,
so I can add you modification to the ``official'' version.

If you comply with my coding conventions, then I can easily merge your
enhancements into the code. Here I list some of them.

@subsection Coding conventions

@itemize
@item
Each function's, option's, ... name starts with @samp{tnsdl-}.

@item
Everything (functions, variables, ...) is documented in its documentation
string.

@item
Functions' (intentional) returned values should be mentioned explicitly in
their docstring.

@item
Whenever it is possible, add functionality via supporting official minor modes
and features instead of reinventing the wheel. Examples: hs-minor-mode, imenu,
`forward-sexp', etc.

@end itemize

@node Copying
@chapter Copying

@insertcopying

@node Supported Features
@appendix Supported Features

Here is a (hopefully full) list of standard Emacs features what are
supported by @value{TM}. I.e. these can be used (in addition to the
special @value{TM}-features) ``out of the box''.

Type @kbd{C-h f @key{RET}} on them to get more info.

@itemize

@item
which-func-mode

@item
imenu (makes TAG files unnecessary locally)

@item
hs-minor-mode (``folding'')

@item
font-lock-mode (syntax highlighting)

@item
compilation-mode (to skip to the problematic source code line from the compilation log)

@end itemize

@node News
@appendix News

@itemize
@item
v2

This is a complete rewrite from scratch. Made by Peter Tury.
It works only with Emacs v22 or later.

New features:

@itemize
@item
complete documentation

@item
standard Emacs customizability (via @kbd{M-x customize-mode})

@item
multi-level and more exact syntax highlighting

@item
folding

@item
tnsdl-specific code browsing (`forward-sexp', etc.)

@item
enhanced(?) automatic indentation

@item
TAG support

@item
compilation support
@end itemize

Removed features:

@itemize
@item
abbreviations (I found `dabbrev-expand' enough)

@item
skeletons (I didn't use them)

@item
unknown functionalities (probably there were some)
@end itemize

@item
v1

First(?) @value{TM} was created and maintained by Harri M‰enp‰‰ until 1992.
Later Toni Arte and Tero Venetjoki maintained it for many years. Its variants
can be used for older Emacses (from version 17(?)).

It knew:
@itemize
@item
one-level syntax highlighting

@item
automatic indentation

@item
menu

@item
imenu support

@item
abbreviations

@item
skeletons
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
